--- PAGE 1 ---
T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi
Z
YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ
SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI
(YDS/2)
İNGİLİZCE
8 EYLÜL 2019
Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi,
fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve
testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır.

--- PAGE 3 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH TEST OF ENGLISH
This test consists of 80 questions.
1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or
4. Maps of the ocean are rare as the vastness and
expression to fill the space.
depth of the ocean make it ---- difficult to study.
A)admirably B)notoriously
1. Research has found that the typical brain is a
C)questionably D)properly
‘mosaic’ combining some features that are more
common in males and some that appear more
E)incidentally
frequently in females, pointing to the ---- that human
brains do not belong to two distinct types
categorised by gender.
A)violation B)conclusion
C)development D)compulsion
E)obstacle
5. Children with autism spectrum conditions often
have trouble ---- the emotional states of people
around them, struggling to distinguish a happy face
from a sad one, for example.
A)overcoming B)ignoring
C)provoking D)identifying
2. Many scientists and research advocates contend
E)improving
that animal experiments are crucial for learning
about basic biology and disease mechanisms, and
are necessary for testing the ---- of new medicines.
A)scarcity B)urgency C)ambiguity
D)efficacy E)uniformity
6. Human accomplishments ---- our ability to acquire
knowledge from others and to use that communal
store of experience to devise novel solutions to
life’s challenges .
A)call off B)stem from
3. Because the functions and disturbances of smell
C)bring down D)take out
and taste are nearly ----, disturbances of one affect
the other.
E)figure out
A)inconvenient B)unremarkable
C)inexplicable D)unsophisticated
E)inseparable
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 4 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
7-16: For these questions, choose the best
9. A tsunami damaged emergency generators that ----
word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s).
power to keep the nuclear reactors at Fukushima in
Japan cool; however, the earthquake ---- to the
tsunami also caused the cooling systems to fail.
7. For the first time, doctors ---- that temporarily
A) should provide / to lead
opening the protective barrier of the human brain ----
to boost the delivery of cancer medication to brain
B) could have provided / to have led
tumours.
A) are showing / helped C)would have provided / leading
B) have shown / helps D)must have provided / having led
C)showed / is helping E) might provide / led
D)will have shown / was helping
E) will be showing / has been helping
10. ---- the 17th century, committed Anglicans produced
a steady flow of religious and devotional literature
that aimed to inspire holiness ---- readers.
A)By / about B)During / through
8. The Martian atmosphere is so thin, and the planet’s
temperature so low that liquid water ---- there, and if
C)Throughout / among D)From / against
it ever did in the past, conditions ---- very different.
A) might not have existed / were to be E)Across / over
B) could not exist / may be
C)would not exist / can be
D)cannot exist / must have been
E) must not exist / should have been
11. The word adolescence is Latin ---- origin, derived
from the verb adolescere, which means ‘to grow
---- adulthood’.
A)through / on B)from / to
C)at / beyond D)in / into
E)with / over
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 5 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
12. ---- immigrants to North America's new colonies 15. Personality is ---- a crucial aspect of psychology ----
were primarily British in the 17th and 18th every main branch of psychological research has
centuries, significant numbers of people of other attempted to contribute to the existing knowledge in
nationalities also established a presence in the this area.
Americas.
A)such / that B)whether / or
A)Because B)While
C)as much / as D)the more / the more
C)As long as D)Provided that
E)neither / nor
E)Once
16. Having a geopolitical significance ---- its unique
13. Not much had been accomplished with the aspect of dividing two continents, the Bosphorus
phenomena of magnetism and static ---- the Chinese stands among distinguished landmarks of Istanbul.
began to use the magnetic compass for navigation A)similar to B)thanks to
around 1000 AD.
A)in case B)while C)in place of D)in spite of
C)until D)if E)contrary to
E)as soon as
14. Liquid water covers more than two-thirds of the
Blue Planet's surface, ---- exactly how it got there
has always been puzzling.
A)so B)instead
C)but D)otherwise
E)as
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 6 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
17-21: For these questions, choose the best
word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19.
passage.
A)leads B)exposes
In 2015, the Australian Shark Attack File, kept by C)attributes D)dedicates
researchers at Sydney’s Taronga Conservation Society,
recorded 33 shark attacks in local waters, two of which E)conveys
were fatal. Both deaths, (17)---- a series of close
encounters in which no one was harmed, were clustered
around the towns of Ballina and Byron Bay in New
South Wales, one of the eastern states of Australia.
(18)---- , in 2014 the total number of attacks was 23; in
2013, that figure stood at 14. “But the stats only tell part
of the story,” says John West, curator of the Australian
Shark Attack File. He (19)---- the rise in attacks not to a
sudden change in shark behaviour but to the higher 20.
number of surfers in the water. “For the last 60 years,
A)were allowing B)have allowed
wetsuits (20)---- people to spend more time in the water
throughout the winter months, thus surfing in those
C)had allowed D)used to allow
conditions increases the risk,” says West. In addition,
marine ecologist Dr. Daniel Bucher suggests that
E)will be allowing
rainfalls in the state’s north could be carrying food for
fish from rivers (21)---- the ocean and attracting sharks.
“Don’t swim if you know there are plenty of bait fish
around,” Bucher advises. “Especially if they’re breaking
the surface, as it usually means something is chasing
them from below.”
21.
A)with B)about C)for
D)into E)upon
17.
A)owing to B)on behalf of
C)by means of D)with the aim of
E)along with
18.
A)Therefore B)That is
C)Eventually D)For instance
E)By comparison
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 7 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
22-26: For these questions, choose the best
word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24.
passage.
A)regardless of B)in contrast with
As early humans moved out of Africa and into colder C)similar to D)in terms of
climates, they were confronted with the problem of
keeping warm. Without a coat of hair to protect E)rather than
themselves against harsh climatic conditions, they
(22)---- an artificial means of retaining body heat in order
to survive. From this basic need developed the rich and
varied dress of the world’s peoples. As societies began
to develop, many other factors (23)---- the specific dress
of a region or a culture, including the relative affluence,
class and hierarchy, migration, war, religion, and
industrialisation. Historically, dress has provided people
with a visual cue that helps them make predictions
about a person (24)---- ethnicity, class, gender,
25.
profession, economic status, and even place of origin. It
A)over B)for C)at
forms an important element in social and economic
history and can be an excellent basis (25)---- the study of
culture. Most cultures have particular dress for D)toward E)from
ceremonial occasions and life celebrations. (26)----,
dress holds a central role in ritual, social, and political
life.
26.
22.
A)Even so B)Instead
A)might find B)should have found
C)However D)Otherwise
C)can find D)had to find
E)Therefore
E)would have found
23.
A)blurred B)endured
C)determined D)exhausted
E)threatened
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 8 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
27-36: For these questions, choose the best
29. For a long time, punishment was viewed as a useful
option to complete the given sentence.
child-rearing tool, ----.
A) since children seek role models who they can observe
and imitate to learn complex social behaviours
27. As the Dakota tribes along the Minnesota River in
the US were fed up with settlers flooding into their
B) furthermore, it evokes strong negative feelings in a
territory, ----. child that he or she relates to the person applying it
A) they were less powerful and thus failed to defeat the
settlers C)therefore, punishment draws attention to the negative
behaviour rather than the desired alternative
B) the settlers were determined to fight against the
Dakota tribes D)yet, it is now recognised that it generally does not lead
to the desired behavioural outcome for children
C)they decided to respond with attacks to push the
settlers off their reservation E) hence, parents punishing their children for an
inappropriate action are not providing an example of
D)the settlers reached an agreement on the territorial the correct behaviour
issues with the Dakota tribes
E) the new settlers of Dakota started a riot to rebel
against the tribal chiefs
30. While each researcher has their own way of
analysing and interpreting animal remains, ----.
A) it must be remembered that sample size and
preservation quality ultimately influence the outcome
28. Because we are bombarded with so much
information and misinformation about what might B) animal remains aid in the interpretation of ancient
cause cancer, ----. resource choices
A) it is often hard to separate myth from reality
C)it is fundamental to determine the locations and social
complexity of archaeological sites
B) it affects every one of us in the same way
D)animal remains can be used to provide information
C)the chance of being diagnosed is one in two about a variety of issues in the study of societies
D)there are some things we can do to reduce our risk of E) some methods, terms and analytical tools are
getting cancer considered standard
E) the extent of public confusion was exposed in a survey
last year
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 9 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
31. Even though animal behaviourists have traditionally 33. ----, someone who is successful in several fields is
avoided linking human emotions, such as grief, with often called a Renaissance man or Renaissance
responses by animals, ----. woman.
A) grief in animals may take forms that are difficult for A) In order to better understand the masterpieces of the
humans to recognise as mourning brilliant Renaissance artists such as Michelangelo and
Raphael
B) observations suggest that the ways in which we mourn
might be uniquely human B) While the Renaissance affected every area of human
activity and knowledge, from art to zoology
C)a growing body of evidence shows that species
ranging from dolphins to ducks mourn the passing of C)Because the Renaissance produced individuals with a
relatives wide range of interests who excelled in a number of
different areas
D)research on grief in wild monkeys that live in social
units has been surprisingly limited so far D)Although most historians shared the view of the period
as a rebirth after the darkness of the Middle Ages
E) we think that humans are the only species that grieves
over the loss of loved ones E) After science advanced when Renaissance humanists
discovered and spread ancient works on mathematics,
medicine, and other topics
32. ----, language, as a complicated phenomenon of the
human mind, does not seem to be restricted to a
34. Peer pressure is what causes people to do things
single region in the brain.
that are popular in order to fit in with others, ----.
A) If neurolinguists want to examine the functioning of the
A) while middle school students influence each other to a
human brain in more detail
great extent
B) Even if certain tasks are fulfilled through coordination
B) however, peers are the people who are of similar age,
among neurons
such as classmates
C)Although it is localised mainly on the left side of the
C)in other words, some individuals resist peer
brain
pressure and prioritise their own personal views
D)As it is a concrete manifestation of the human mind
D)so it can be a very powerful driving force in the lives of
adolescents
E) When the brain is overwhelmed with long and complex
sentences
E) as psychologists use positive peer pressure as a
method to change a child’s behaviour
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 10 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
37-42: For these questions, choose the most
accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in
35. According to skeletal therapists, it is vital that
English, and the most accurate English translation
women strengthen their bodies in their 40s, ----.
of the sentences in Turkish.
A) so a considerable number of women do not know very
well how to maintain their bone health
37. Alternative medicine has become increasingly
B) as bone density starts to gradually decrease, leaving popular in the Western world since about 1975, and
the bones fragile during this period has been the subject of much research ever since.
A) Yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında gittikçe
C)but hunched shoulders and poor posture can lead to a
yaygınlaşan alternatif tıp, bu tarihten itibaren birçok
range of health issues in the old age
araştırmanın konusu olmuştur.
D)as long as muscles work optimally to support the B) Alternatif tıp, Batı dünyasında yaklaşık 1975’ten beri
skeleton and the body is positioned correctly gittikçe popüler hâle gelmiştir ve bu tarihten itibaren
pek çok araştırmanın konusu olmuştur.
E) even though bad posture is known to give them an
awkward look and might lead to serious ailments in C)Alternatif tıp, Batı dünyasında yaklaşık 1975’ten beri
time gitgide yaygınlaşarak bu tarihten itibaren çok sayıda
araştırmanın konusu olmuştur.
D)Yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında gittikçe artan
bir popülerliğe sahip olan alternatif tıp, bu tarihten
itibaren birçok araştırmaya konu olmuştur.
E) Alternatif tıp, yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında
gitgide tanındığı için bu tarihten itibaren birçok
36. Fast food has emerged as one of the biggest araştırmanın konusu olmuştur.
enemies of health, especially for children, ----.
A) thus its high consumption makes sense when the
prices are considered
B) provided that the most common cause of obesity is the
wide availability of fast food
C)while people are highly concerned about the nutritional
deficiency of foods like burgers
D)so the fast food industry has received a lot of critical
attention in recent years
E) as many fast food restaurants have started to provide
healthier alternatives such as salads
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 11 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
38. Forensic investigators make a permanent record of 39. Bullying has been documented in almost every
anything at a crime scene that is relevant to the culture around the world, though there is evidence
crime, and not only does this attention prevent that it may be more prevalent in some countries
dependence on highly unreliable human memory, than in others.
and it also provides evidence that is likely to be
A) Dünya genelinde neredeyse bütün ülkelerde zorbalığa
accepted in court.
dair kanıtlar bulunmaktadır ancak bazı kültürlerde
A) Adli araştırmacıların olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin diğerlerinde olduğundan daha yaygın olabileceği ispat
kalıcı kaydını tutmaları ve onların bu dikkatleri, edilmiştir.
oldukça güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı
olmayı engellemekle kalmaz, mahkemede B) Dünya genelinde neredeyse her kültürde kanıtları olan
muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt da sağlar. zorbalığın bazı ülkelerde diğerlerinde olduğundan
daha yaygın olabileceği ispat edilmiştir.
B) Olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin kalıcı kaydını tutan
C)Dünya genelinde neredeyse her kültürde bulunduğu
adli araştırmacılar ve onların bu dikkatleri, oldukça
ispat edilmiş olsa da zorbalığın bazı ülkelerde
güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmayı
diğerlerine oranla daha yaygın olduğuna dair kanıtlar
engellemekle birlikte mahkemeye muhtemelen kabul
bulunmuştur.
edilebilecek kanıt sağlar.
D)Zorbalığın dünya çapında neredeyse her kültürde var
C)Adli araştırmacılar, olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin
olduğu ispat edilmiştir ancak bazı ülkelerde
kalıcı kaydını tutarlar ve bu dikkat sadece oldukça
diğerlerinde olduğundan daha yaygın olabileceğine
güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmayı
dair kanıtlar bulunmaktadır.
engellemekle kalmaz aynı zamanda mahkemede
muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt da sağlar.
E) Bazı ülkelerde diğerlerine oranla daha yaygın
olabileceğine dair kanıtlar bulunan zorbalığın, dünya
D)Adli araştırmacılar, olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin
genelinde neredeyse her kültürde var olduğu ispat
kalıcı kaydını dikkatle tutarlar ve bu, hem oldukça
edilmiştir.
güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmalarını
engeller hem de mahkemede muhtemelen kabul
edilebilecek kanıt sunmalarını sağlar.
E) Adli araştırmacılar olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin
kalıcı kaydını dikkatli bir şekilde tutarak hem oldukça
güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmaktan
kaçınırlar hem de mahkemede muhtemelen kabul
edilebilecek kanıt elde ederler.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 12 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
40. Aşırı yağlı yiyecekler tüketen insanların diğerlerine 41. Anoreksiya nervoza; perhiz ve ince olma takıntısının
göre kalitesiz gece uykusundan yakınmaları daha aşırı kilo kaybına yol açtığı bir beslenme
muhtemeldir, çünkü yağ tüketimi hormonları ve bozukluğudur, ancak birey kilo kaybını bir sağlık
metabolizmayı olumsuz etkiler, ki bunların ikisi de problemi olarak kabul etmez.
uykuyu düzenleyen biyolojik saatle etkileşim
A) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder caused by an
içerisindedir.
individual’s obsession with dieting and thinness that
A) People who live on high-fat foods are more likely to results in excessive weight loss, though the individual
suffer from poor night-time sleep than others, because does not accept the weight loss as a health problem.
hormones and metabolism, both of which interact with
the internal clock to regulate sleep, are adversely B) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder in which an
affected by fat intake. individual is obsessed with dieting and thinness and
thus loses excessive weight, but the individual does
B) People who consume high-fat foods are more likely to not view the weight loss as a health problem.
suffer from poor night-time sleep than others, as fat
intake negatively affects hormones and metabolism, C)Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder where
both of which interact with the internal clock that obsession with dieting and thinness leads to excessive
regulates sleep. weight loss, but the individual does not acknowledge
the weight loss as a health problem.
C)Because fat intake negatively affects both hormones
D)Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder that leads an
and metabolism and their interaction with the internal
individual to lose excessive weight because of his or
clock that regulates sleep, people who prefer high-fat
her obsession with dieting and thinness; however, the
foods are more likely to suffer from poor night-time
individual does not consider the weight loss as a
sleep than others.
health problem.
D)When people consume high-fat foods, they become
E) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder that causes an
more likely to suffer from poor night-time sleep than
individual who is obsessed with dieting and thinness to
others, as fat intake adversely affects hormones and
lose excessive weight, which is not seen as a health
metabolism, both of which interact with the internal
problem by that individual.
clock in regulating sleep.
E) Compared to others, people who eat high-fat foods are
more likely to suffer from poor night-time sleep and the
negative effect of the fat intake on their hormones and
metabolism, both of which interact with the internal
clock that regulates sleep.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 13 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
42. İlk kentlerin tam olarak ne zaman, nerede ve nasıl
ortaya çıktığına dair devam eden tartışmalar olsa da
çoğu araştırmacı bu kentlerin beş ya da altı bin yıl
önce dünyanın çeşitli bölgelerinde kurulduğunu ileri
sürmektedir.
A) Most researchers claim that the first cities were built
five or six thousand years ago in various regions
around the world, yet there are still ongoing debates
about precisely when, where and how these cities
arose.
B) Even though discussions go on with regard to exactly
when, where and how the first cities arose, many
researchers argue that these cities were built five or
six thousand years ago in various regions around the
world.
C) Most researchers put forward that the first cities were
built five or six thousand years ago in different parts of
the world although debates still continue regarding
exactly when, where and how these cities arose.
D) Although there are ongoing debates about exactly
when, where and how the first cities arose, most
researchers put forward that these cities were built five
or six thousand years ago in various regions around
the world.
E) In spite of the ongoing debates about precisely when,
where and how the first cities arose, most researchers
presume that these cities in different regions around
the world were built five or six thousand years ago.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 14 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
43-46: Answer these questions according to the
passage below. 44. Which of the following could be true of the inventor
of eyeglasses?
A) His usual work involved devising new instruments that
You may think that the leap from naked-eye observation improved human vision.
to instrument-aided vision could be one of the greatest
advances in the history of the planet. But nobody set out B) He was an experienced glassmaker who had a keen
to invent a telescope or eyeglasses. One of the deepest interest in optics.
and most widespread human conceptions was faith in
the unaided human senses, particularly the naked eye. C)He may have been an old inventor who did not want to
We do not know who invented eyeglasses, how or boast about his invention.
where. Everything we know suggests that they were
invented by chance, and by a layman who had not been D)Since he had difficulty seeing while working with glass
taught about optics. Perhaps an elderly glassmaker disks, he invented eyeglasses to improve his vision.
making glass disks for leaded windows tested a disk by
E) He might have invented eyeglasses unintentionally
looking through it and found to his delight that he could
while working on an unrelated project.
see much better. We can suspect that the inventor was
not an academic, as professors would delight in
boasting of their invention, and before the 13th century,
we have no record by any such self-styled inventor. The
Italian word lente (English ‘lens’ from ‘lentil’ - the edible
seed) or lente di vetro (glass lentil) first used to describe
the invention was obviously unacademic; it is clearly not
the sort of word that a professor would use to describe 45. What makes the author think that the invention of
the application of his optical theories. From the first eyeglasses was unacademic?
recorded uses of eyeglasses before 1300 until the A) Most academicians did not pay attention to this
invention of the telescope nearly three hundred years invention as they were captivated by a more
later, lenses were ignored by scholars. sophisticated tool – the telescope.
B) The very first word to refer to this invention seemed
too odd to be linked with optical theories formulated by
a professor.
43. What was the reason for the initial lack of interest in C)Eyeglasses were invented by a glassmaker who did
making instruments for improving human vision? not have any knowledge about optical theories.
A) People saw no prospects for developments in the field
D)Professors would not consider the invention of
of optics with respect to improving human vision.
eyeglasses remarkable enough to boast about.
B) Instruments that aided human vision were not a
E) Professors actually began to study lenses in a detailed
popular topic of interest among scholars and
way after the invention of the telescope.
glassmakers.
C)There were too few scholars who had the necessary
skills to invent instruments that could improve human
vision.
D)Scholars were not willing to collaborate with each
other to invent optical devices.
E) People had a strongly-held belief in the superiority of
the naked eye.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 15 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
46. What is the main idea of the passage?
A) Like most other inventions in the modern world,
eyeglasses are the product of human wisdom and
struggle.
B) Despite being an important technological innovation,
the specifics related to the invention of eyeglasses
remain unknown.
C)Not all scientific projects lead to success despite the
concentrated efforts of academicians.
D)Scholars in the past were often against new
technologies, so they rarely used them even if they
enhanced the quality of their lives.
E) The etymology of the word lente gives us reliable
information about the inventor of the greatest
advancement in optical technology.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 16 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
47-50: Answer these questions according to the
passage below. 48. What is the author’s attitude towards the current US
administration’s climate policies?
A)impartial B)dissatisfied
The annual melt of Arctic ice is under way, and the melt
is getting worse and worse. The size of the ice cap C)indifferent D)appreciative
where the melt is taking place has become the smallest
since satellite records began. It will not be many more E)sarcastic
years until the Arctic is ice-free in summer. This is not
news. Nor is the fact that the US is about to break its
promise on its climate change policies, again. The scale
and speed of worrying events in the Arctic is increasing,
so is the recklessness of the current administration’s
climate policies. The two are closely connected: without
comprehensive, rapid, global action, there is zero
49. It is clearly stated in the passage that the antibiotic
chance of preventing irreversible change in the Arctic,
crisis ----.
which may bring catastrophe to the rest of the world.
What is also not-news is the antibiotic crisis. For years, A) might have been alleviated thanks to the extensive
if not decades, medics have been warning that overuse use penicillin
is driving up resistance, threating to propel us back to a
pre-penicillin age when common bacterial infections B) has diminished as a result of coordinated efforts to
could be fatal. Both are large, complex problems arising raise awareness of the issue
from technological progress. Both are tragedies that
require collective action. But on antibiotic resistance, C)could have been prevented if doctors had been
there are signs that the problem is getting less severe, warned about it much earlier
thanks largely to changing prescription habits, following
great collective action, which is missing in the climate D)is different from the climate change crisis in terms of
change problem. politicians’ level of sensitivity
E) can be tackled through the effective use of
technological developments
47. According to the passage, the Arctic melt ----.
A) has only recently been found to cause ice-free
summers in the Arctic soon
50. What is the main aim of the author in writing this
B) has finally led the US to keep its promise on its climate
passage?
change policies
A) To emphasise the importance of collective action in
C)was taking place at a faster pace before satellite addressing major global problems
recordings began
B) To show how carefully governments are trying to cope
D)will possibly result in worldwide devastation due to a with global issues
lack of sound climate policies
C)To criticise the US government’s policies on climate
E) is one of the most immediate priorities of a large change and the antibiotic crisis
number of governments worldwide
D)To compare the methods used in the handling of the
antibiotic crisis and climate change
E) To highlight the incompetence of policy-makers in
combatting global tragedies
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 17 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
51-54: Answer these questions according to the
passage below. 52. What caused child labourers in the United States to
become illiterate?
A) They were supposed to contribute to the nation’s
Child labour has traditionally referred to the use of economic growth, so factory-owners did not allow
children to perform adult work on farms and in factories them to go to school.
and mines. Ironically, it has helped as well as hindered
B) They believed that engaging in food and tobacco
the development of universal public education in the
production would bring them much more benefits than
United States. Historically, this problem did not become
attending school.
a controversial social issue until the beginning of the
Industrial Revolution in the late 18th century. After a
C)They did not have to learn to read and write to perform
series of wars produced a shortage of adult male labour
simple tasks in factories.
in Britain, cotton mill owners offered children free room
and meals in company-owned dormitories in exchange
D)Landowners did not want them to go to the schools
for their labour. Government authorities were delighted
where their children were taught since they thought
to get homeless children off the streets. For the mills,
this would cause a social conflict.
the introduction of child labour proved one of the most
profitable innovations of the Industrial Revolution. The E) A great majority of the schools were only accepting the
practice spread to the United States, which also faced a children of landowners, so they could not receive
shortage of adult male factory workers to produce food education.
and tobacco, the staples of the new nation’s trade. At
the time, most schools were already reserved for the
children of landowners, and therefore, an entire
generation of child labourers had grown up illiterate by
the 1830s. As the quality of goods they produced
deteriorated and overseas sales of American goods
declined, many of the very industrialists who had 53. What was the real reason why industrialists started
exploited child labour at the turn of the century joined to promote universal compulsory education?
social reformers who wanted to end such exploitation,
A) Child labour combined with compulsory education was
supporting universal compulsory education to ensure
a practical option to cope with the shortage of adult
that their future workers would be able to read, write and
male factory workers.
calculate.
B) Child labour eventually had an adverse impact on the
quality of American goods, which reduced export
earnings.
C)Most of the child labourers were unable to read, write
51. Why did child labour become an important issue and calculate, which was a disturbing fact for
during the Industrial Revolution? industrialists in sociocultural terms.
A) The number of homeless children in the streets
D)Social reformers forced industrialists to acknowledge
increased dramatically.
the fact that children must be well-educated.
B) Government officials were reluctant to provide
E) Social reformers were against the brutal exploitation of
homeless children with free room and meals.
child labour since children could not receive
compulsory education.
C)The size of the labour force in Britain declined since
wars resulted in a lack of adult male workers.
D)The development of universal public education was
enhanced by government authorities.
E) Children who worked for cotton mill owners could
earn a huge amount of money.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 18 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
54. What is the primary purpose of the author?
A) To explain the reasons why child labour was not as
effective in the United States as it was in Britain
B) To inform readers about how farms, factories and
mines throughout the world benefitted from child
labour in the late 1800s
C)To emphasise that farms, factories and mines would
not have been productive enough without child
labour during the Industrial Revolution
D)To highlight that child labour, initially considered
advantageous, later proved to be disadvantageous
E) To draw attention to the successful collaboration
between industrialists and social reformers to support
universal compulsory education
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 19 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
55-58: Answer these questions according to the
passage below. 56. It is stated in the passage that Isaac Asimov ----.
A) led the way to discovery of several exoplanets that
host life-friendly exotic liquids such as hexane, ethers
Earth is teeming with life — and water makes it all and chloroform
possible. But elsewhere in the cosmos, life might be
B) was the first person to understand that a solvent
built from different chemicals that dissolve and
chemical, even if not water, is necessary for life to
assemble in some other liquid: perhaps methane,
develop
kerosene, or even chloroform. For now, it is not feasible
for humans to set foot on those worlds and see what is
C)came up with the idea that life might have formed
there, but researchers are exploring some possibilities
elsewhere in the universe with a different chemistry
in labs here on Earth. The idea of a strange parallel
than we know
form of life, whose cells do the same basic things as
ours using a completely different chemistry, is not new D)developed his thoughts about the strange parallel
to science. In fact, Isaac Asimov broached the subject forms of life using the data provided by the Cassini
in his 1962 essay “Not as We Know It: The Chemistry of spacecraft which studies Saturn
Life.” And in 2004, the same year the Cassini spacecraft
entered Saturn’s orbit, biochemist Steven Benner E) inspired Steve Benner who wrote in 2004 that liquid
proposed that on a world like Saturn’s moon Titan, life hydrocarbons might make life possible on a world like
might use liquid hydrocarbons as a solvent (a liquid that Saturn’s moon Titan
can dissolve other substances), the way water is used
on Earth. With new exoplanets joining the roster of
known worlds every day, it is likely that some of them
have oceans (or at least warm puddles) of hexane,
ethers, chloroform, or other exotic liquids that might
serve as a source of life, which we do not yet know.
57. The underlined word in the passage ‘broached’ is
closest in meaning to ----.
A)introduced B)distorted
55. According to the passage, chemicals such as
methane, kerosene and chloroform ----. C)revised D)obscured
A) cannot be compared with water in their capacity to
dissolve life chemicals E)simplified
B) have been found on several exoplanets humans are
planning to set foot on
C)have been proved to be much better alternatives to
water, which makes life possible
58. What is the passage mainly about?
D)could possibly be solvents of various chemicals that
form life A) The contributions of Asimov and Benner to the
understanding of life on Earth
E) should be researched more extensively in order to
protect life on Earth B) The search for alternatives to water that can support
extraterrestrial life
C)The newly discovered exoplanets being studied to
determine if they potentially host life
D)The role of water as a solvent in the formation of life
on Earth
E) The chemical processes underlying the formation of
water on other planets
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 20 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
59-62: Answer these questions according to the
passage below. 60. It is understood from the passage that in the
merit-based pay system, ----.
A) supervisors’ strict control over employees may
Companies often link pay increases to a measure backfire as weak performance
of performance to motivate and retain the best
employees, which may also ensure the companies’ B) employees are allowed to rate their own performance
long-term success. Among many forms of individual
performance-related pay, the most popular is C)supervisors’ rating points determine the amount of the
merit-based pay. Under such a system, an employee’s pay increase
pay increase is based on a supervisor’s assessment of
performance over a previous time period, usually the D)an employee gets a pay increase when his or her
prior 12 months. The annual cycle of the pay scheme performance is higher than those of others
begins with the establishment of performance
objectives, either by the supervisor or jointly between E) employees may get a pay increase during the
the employee and the supervisor. Progress is monitored supervision period
over the ensuing months, and the supervisor rates the
performance of an employee, on a given scale, against
these objectives. Each of these rating points is then
associated with the amount of a pay increase,
expressed as a percentage, so the higher the rating, the
higher the pay increase. The size of the pay increase
can also vary depending on the position in the pay 61. What can be concluded about a pay increase in the
range. Typically, employees at the bottom of the pay merit-based pay system?
range with high-performance ratings will get a larger
A) Younger employees may not get a high pay increase
increase than an employee near the top of the
since they may not compete well with experienced
pay range with a high-performance rating. In some
ones.
cases, the intention is to enable the employee to reach
the top of the pay range at the same time as he or she B) Employees deserve a pay increase only if they have
is ready to be promoted. The difficulty is that this gained the qualifications required for a promotion.
system is not supported by all employees. Research
has demonstrated that merit-based pay is attractive C)Companies try to keep the best employees at the
to some occupations, for example managers, and to top of the pay range by providing them with the
certain demographic groups, such as white-collar highest pay increase.
workers, high-income earners, and younger employees,
but it might not be the best payment approach for all D)No matter how hard they try, employees in the lowest
occupations and companies. position cannot get a pay increase as high as that of
the ones who are at the top of the pay range.
E) Industrious employees with a low income may get a
higher percentage of pay increase than those
having a high income.
59. It is stated in the passage that companies ----.
A) can contribute to their future prosperity by motivating
their employees with a pay increase
B) use various forms of payment depending on the
importance of the position
C)evaluate their employees’ previous performance to lay
out future performance criteria
D)increase the motivation of their employees by setting
attainable performance objectives
E) should use individual performance-related pay to
motivate their non-efficient employees
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 21 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
62. What is the drawback of the merit-based pay system
according to the passage?
A) Employees have no right to take part in the formulation
of performance criteria.
B) It is not efficient because it does not guarantee the
promotion of hard-working employees.
C)Rating points may not accurately reflect an employee’s
performance.
D)It may not be favoured by everyone since it benefits
certain positions and careers.
E) It does not help to assess employees’ monthly
performance since it is applied annually.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 22 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
63-67: For these questions, choose the best
64. Doctor:
option to complete the dialogue.
 Most people don’t worry about their eye health,
but we often say that all of us need an eye test,
even if we can see fine.
63. Student:
 How do leaves know that it’s autumn? Reporter:
 You’re right, but people generally don’t see a
Teacher: doctor unless they have a problem with their
 During the autumn, every day is four minutes vision. So, could you tell us why you highlight the
shorter than the one before it. This means leaves importance of eye examinations?
have four minutes less sunlight.
Doctor:
Student:  ----
 ----
Reporter:
Teacher:  It seems early diagnosis is crucial in fighting
 Exactly! And, at some point, when it’s simply not some eye diseases.
worth the effort, trees shed their leaves.
A) If people would make a conscious effort to try to
A) In other words, they have a relatively smaller amount understand their visual health through personal
of time to change light and water into energy. research, many eye diseases would be less
problematic.
B) Does this mean some trees closest to streetlights
keep their leaves later into autumn? B) Eye tests not only help us treat visual impairment, but
they can also reveal the presence of some non-eye
C)But the decrease in the amount of sunlight is not the diseases like diabetes and high blood pressure.
sole reason, is it?
C)Many eye conditions show no symptoms, and if
D)So, trees are very strong and in winter even produce people put off eye tests until they experience
their own anti-freeze in their cells. symptoms like blurry vision, the damage could already
be irreversible.
E) That’s because leaves can’t distinguish between
D)The frequency of eye tests differs with age and the
sunlight and artificial light, right?
health of the person, but we often recommend an eye
test every two years between ages 19 and 40.
E) Visual problems are not the single cause. People
should also have an eye test when they experience
redness, pain, discharge or flashes of light.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 23 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
65. Daisy: 66. Amanda:
 Look at the lighthouse over there. It’s on a very  Don't you think people attach too much of their
steep hill. Do you think there is someone in it? personal happiness to their weight?
Kate: Jane:
 ----  Definitely! They're even willing to spend huge
sums of money for the slightest chance of being
Daisy: thinner, especially overweight people and the
 Perhaps the huge antenna on the roof can explain ones who suffer from obesity.
that.
Amanda:
Kate:  Yeah, but so many of them get frustrated in the
 So, the lighthouse-keeper just goes there process because it's more complicated than it
for periodic maintenance of the equipment. looks.
A) I’m not certain. Some modern installations are
Jane:
controlled remotely from a convenient location.
 What do you mean?
B) I can’t say for sure, but it seems there is no one there.
Amanda:
Otherwise, the lights would be on.
 ----
C)Probably! Lighthouses usually overlook the sea from a
coastal hill and provide a safe shelter for the residents. Jane:
 Oh, so dietary advice won't work in the same way
D)Yes, and I’m really curious about daily routines of a for everybody.
lighthouse-keeper. Watching the ships must be A) The vast majority of people place such a high value on
entertaining. being thin that overweight people face prejudice and
discrimination.
E) I don’t think so. Lighthouses guide ships with a strong
light, so why should they be attended? B) The view that undisciplined eating habits are the major
cause of weight gain has been widespread for a long
time.
C)Fortunately, dieticians have been coming up with a
variety of new treatments to fight unhealthy weight
gain.
D)The reality is weight-gain has many causes and there
can be various combinations of these causes in
different people.
E) Permanent lifestyle changes like making healthy food
choices can promote long-term weight loss.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 24 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
68-71: For these questions, choose the best
67. Chris:
rephrased form of the given sentence.
 A group of scientists tried to develop drones that
could fly through the hoops or gates used in
drone racing, and prepared a track with gates laid
out in a circuit. 68. The invention of television was not a single event,
but rather it depended on a chain of developments
Luke: in electricity, telegraphy, and photography.
 Really? Were their drones able to stay on course?
A) Though seeming as a distinct event, the invention of
television had to wait for several developments in
Chris:
electricity, telegraphy, and photography.
 ----
B) A variety of developments in electricity, telegraphy,
Luke: and photography gave rise to the invention of
 That’s a key development. A drone that can television, which was seen as a remarkable event.
autonomously escape from things in its way could
C)Television did not come about all by itself, as a series
be useful in a number of contexts.
of innovations in electricity, telegraphy, and
A) The on-board camera in each device gathered images
photography led to its invention.
of the gates and the pictures allowed a neural network
controlling drones to learn how to pass through them. D)But for the innovations in electricity, telegraphy, and
photography, the invention of television could not have
B) If they were smarter, they could be relied on to deliver
occurred as a spectacular event.
packages in complex environments like cities.
E) Television developed as a specific invention; however,
C)The study revealed that they had to come up with a set of developments in electricity, telegraphy, and
better ways for drones to learn to avoid obstacles as photography became more important than its
they fly. invention.
D)Drones have a habit of crashing, so they planned to
alter the position of these obstacles after each lap.
E) Their performance in simulated experiments does not
guarantee success in real life. It’s early to say that a
drone can pilot itself in environments with lots of
obstacles like disaster zones.
69. The system of logic, formulated by Aristotle and
considered to include the laws that govern thought,
remained unaltered until the 19th century.
A) The 19th century witnessed a change in the system of
logic, which was created by Aristotle after he defined
the laws that govern thought.
B) Throughout the 19th century, the system of logic
developed by Aristotle was believed to involve the
laws that govern thought.
C)It was only in the 19th century that the system of logic,
established by Aristotle and believed to include the
laws that govern thought, began to change.
D)In the 19th century, the system of logic, which was
drawn up by Aristotle, went through a change because
the laws that govern thought started to change as well.
E) Aristotle is considered to have developed the system
of logic, which embraces the laws that govern thought
and has not been changed since the 19th century.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 25 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
70. Because eating disorders are neither purely physical 71. In the 1950s, popular demand for more powerful
nor purely psychological, medical management and cars was met by manufacturers by further
psychotherapy should be combined for effective increasing the size of the engine and the rotation
treatment. speed, although these changes were at the expense
of fuel economy.
A) While eating disorders can be separated into physical
and psychological ones, successful treatment requires A) In the 1950s, powerful cars with larger engines and
a combination of medical intervention and faster rotation speed had a negative impact on fuel
psychotherapy. economy, so people wanted manufacturers to produce
cars that would be fuel-efficient.
B) Eating disorders can be treated effectively with
medical intervention or psychotherapy, based on B) Had there been no attempt by manufacturers in the
whether they are mostly physical or psychological. 1950s to increase the size of the engine and the
rotation speed, people might not have demanded
C)To treat eating disorders effectively, regardless of their
more powerful cars, and thus fuel economy would
classification as physical or psychological, medical
have remained stable.
management should be accompanied by
psychotherapy.
C)Even though it led to less economical fuel use, in the
1950s, manufacturers started to make bigger engines
D)Given that eating disorders cannot be classified as
and increase the rotation speed to persuade people
only physical or psychological, effective treatment
into buying cars that would become more powerful.
should include both medical intervention and
psychotherapy. D)People started to seek more powerful cars in the
1950s, and manufacturers responded to this by
E) Since eating disorders are not only physical
making engines bigger and the rotation speed faster,
but psychological as well, psychotherapy should be
while it meant damaging the fuel economy.
administered more often than medical management to
treat them successfully. E) In the 1950s, manufacturers met people’s demand for
more powerful cars by making the engine bigger and
the rotation speed faster, but they were not able to
predict that it would result in a worse fuel economy.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 26 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
72-75: For these questions, choose the best
option to complete the missing part of the 73. Wilhelm Röntgen was born in Germany, but lived in
passage. the Netherlands for part of his childhood. He studied
mechanical engineering in Zurich before becoming
a lecturer in physics at Strasbourg University in
72. Unlike learning a second language, acquiring a first 1874, and a professor two years later. He took senior
or native language does not require systematic positions at several universities during his career.
instruction. Parents usually do not teach children ---- However, in the world of science, he is best
the rules of language or do not tell them what kinds known for his research into X-rays, and in 1901, he
of sentences they can and cannot say. ---- For was awarded the first Nobel Prize in Physics for this
example, English speaking children might continue work.
to say bringed rather than brought even though
A) Röntgen was always shy of having an assistant, and
parents occasionally correct them.
he usually preferred to work alone and built much of
A) Parents' corrections inform children of what is not the apparatus he used by himself.
possible in the language they are exposed to.
B) By 1900, Röntgen’s discovery of high energy
B) Although parents generally do not correct their electromagnetic radiation in the form of X-rays was
children, corrections can improve the children's being used in medical diagnosis.
language.
C)Röntgen studied many different areas of physics,
C)Children are rarely corrected, and even when they are, including light, gases, heat transfer, and thermal
they resist the correction. conductivity of crystals.
D)Children often take advantage of parents' correction D)In his laboratory in Germany, Röntgen discovered
and reformulate their utterances. X-rays by accident while he was studying the
conduction of electricity through gases at low
E) If children ask a question, parents will hardly check for pressure.
its grammatical correctness.
E) Despite the numerous prizes, medals and honorary
doctorates he had, Röntgen retained the
characteristics of a strikingly modest man.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 27 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
74. There is a new milk in town; there are many, 75. Much of what archaeologists know about past
actually. The old alternatives to cow’s milk – soy, human life is uncertain and partial. For example,
rice, and coconut milk – are now joined on grocery archaeologists argue about the dates that human
shelves by alternative milks made from almonds, life began and changed. New discoveries constantly
peanuts, cashews, oats, peas – the list goes on and force scientists to rethink the dating given to major
on. You can even buy milk made from potatoes or developments in human prehistory. Even the
bananas. ---- But is that really true? Almond and primary method of identifying the age of
cashew milks have less than half the calories found discoveries, known as radiocarbon dating, is
in cow’s milk, but are lower in protein. For those subject to second-guessing. Often different sources
with allergies to nuts, banana milk is the way to go, have different dates. Another difficulty is that there
but it can be difficult to find. Each type of alternative are simply not many sources of evidence about early
milk has its benefits and limitations. You should human life. ---- Because of these difficulties, much
decide what is most important to you – nutrition, of what is known about prehistoric man is based on
sustainability, or allergies. the best guesses of scientists who may have
devoted their life’s work to the subject.
A) Alternative milks are only healthy if combined with a
well-balanced diet, though the same is true of cow’s A) The older the historical remains, the more valuable
milk. and surprising they are to archaeologists.
B) Manufacturers have recently begun to position such B) Archaeologists must form their picture of early life
products as a reasonable alternative. based on small sets of discovered materials separated
by both time and distance.
C)Alternative milks vary greatly in their nutritional value,
and while some have a mild flavour, others have a C)Another form of evidence comes from early rock
stronger taste. paintings and etchings that have depicted human
clothes, hair, and body decoration.
D)Most alternative milks are friendlier to the environment
than dairy products, as the carbon footprint of D)Archaeologists must carefully dig the remnants of the
producing, packaging and transporting cow’s milk is human past from out of the earth.
very high.
E) The problem of understanding the clothing of early
E) However, people do not drink alternative milks for their humans is even more difficult by the fragile nature
nutritional benefits; instead, they tend to use them for of fur.
their coffee or cereal.
Go on to the next page

--- PAGE 28 ---
2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH
76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant
79. (I) Both students and teachers may consult grammar
sentence in the passage.
books for a number of reasons.(II)For example,
students may be drafting a piece of written work and
may want to check if they are using some grammar
76. (I)Astronomers are searching for twins of Earth orbiting rules correctly. (III)Alternatively, a teacher, having
other sunlike stars. (II)Yet, the more closely scientists noticed that a student is making a lot of mistakes in one
study our own planet's habitability, the less ideal our particular area, might tell that student to look up the
world appears to be. (III)Detecting Earth-like twins language in a grammar book to understand it better.
remains at the edge of our technical capabilities. (IV)There are a large number of grammar books
(IV)Larger super-Earths orbiting smaller stars are easier available, most of which are criticised by students for
to detect and may be the most common type of planet. including highly difficult grammar exercises.(V) When it
(V) New thinking suggests that these systems may also comes to teachers, they often use grammar books to
be habitable and more conducive to life than our own check grammar concepts, especially when an area is so
planet. complex that they need to re-visit it from time to time to
remind themselves of the full picture.
A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
77. (I)The world of plants is rich and diversified and
produces numerous herbal remedies that have been 80. (I) The ancient Olympic Games, known to us from
used for thousands of years. (II)A qualified herbalist and ancient literature and art and from modern archaeology,
a well-respected herbal guide or specialist are generally were the oldest and most prestigious athletic
expected to be conferred with for the most effective competition of antiquity.(II) Although they have inspired
herbal treatments. (III)Today, modern scientific research the modern Olympics, the ancient games must be seen
continues to document and validate the historical in their own ancient Greek cultural context.(III)Despite
traditional uses of many herbs as well as new uses of common misperceptions, the ancient Olympics differed
some traditional medicines. (IV)The safe and from their modern counterpart in organisation, events,
responsible use of traditional herbal medicines offers an and ideology. (IV)The permanent home of the ancient
important way to lower health care costs and increase Olympics was an isolated religious sanctuary on the
the wellness of the public. (V)It is most likely that more Alpheios River in the territory of the state of Elis in
scientific research will continue to place herbs in a southwestern Greece. (V) With sacred rituals and
position to offer many benefits in the new medicine of wreaths of olive leaves as prizes, the ancient Olympic
the 21st century. Games were part of a great religious festival in honour
of Zeus, the Greeks’ chief god.
A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
78. (I) Water is one of the essential natural resources that
have been the centre of attention in the last century due
to pollution and excessive consumption, particularly in
the developed world. (II) Water itself does not conduct
electricity particularly well, yet it is the chemicals
dissolved in it that are the source of the trouble.
(III) For example, the salt content of seawater makes it a
million times better at conducting electricity than
ultra-pure water. (IV)Even so, even a trace of water can
prove fatal with high voltages. (V) This is the very reason
why people have been killed thinking they can move live
cables using a freshly broken tree branch.
A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
END OF THE TEST
CHECK YOUR ANSWERS

--- PAGE 29 ---
192001043743750500K04
OSYM001

--- PAGE 30 ---
2019 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 2
2019 - YDS/2
08-09-2019
TEST OF ENGLISH TEST OF ENGLISH
1. B 48. B
2. D 49. B
3. E 50. A
4. B 51. C
5. D 52. E
6. B 53. B
7. B 54. D
8. D 55. D
9. C 56. C
10. C 57. A
11. D 58. B
12. B 59. A
13. C 60. C
14. C 61. E
15. A 62. D
16. B 63. A
17. E 64. C
18. E 65. A
19. C 66. D
20. B 67. A
21. D 68. C
22. D 69. C
23. C 70. D
24. D 71. D
25. B 72. C
26. E 73. C
27. C 74. B
28. A 75. B
29. D 76. B
30. E 77. B
31. C 78. A
32. C 79. D
33. C 80. D
34. D
35. B
36. D
37. B
38. C
39. D
40. B
41. C
42. D
43. E
44. E
45. B
46. B
47. D

